<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIX: The Persian Cat</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-29" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">The Persian Cat</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>I sat in silence and shame. What he said was true: I had not been a wise neighbour to the Little Ones!</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRaven resumed:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou wronged at the same time the stupid creatures themselves. For them slavery would have been progress. To them a few such lessons as you could have given them with a stick from one of their own trees, would have been invaluable.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI did not know they were cowards!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat difference does that make? The man who grounds his action on another‚Äôs cowardice, is essentially a coward himself.‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI fear worse will come of it! By this time the Little Ones might have been able to protect themselves from the princess, not to say the giants‚ÅÝ‚Äîthey were always fit enough for that; as it was they laughed at them! but now, through your relations with her‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI hate her!‚Äù I cried.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDid you let her know you hated her?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Again I was silent.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNot even to her have you been faithful!‚ÅÝ‚ÄîBut hush! we were followed from the fountain, I fear!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo living creature did I see!‚ÅÝ‚Äîexcept a disreputable-looking cat that bolted into the shrubbery.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt was a magnificent Persian‚ÅÝ‚Äîso wet and draggled, though, as to look what she was‚ÅÝ‚Äîworse than disreputable!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat do you mean, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRaven?‚Äù I cried, a fresh horror taking me by the throat. ‚Äú‚ÅÝ‚ÄîThere was a beautiful blue Persian about the house, but she fled at the very sound of water!‚ÅÝ‚ÄîCould she have been after the goldfish?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe shall see!‚Äù returned the librarian. ‚ÄúI know a little about cats of several sorts, and there is that in the room which will unmask this one, or I am mistaken in her.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He rose, went to the door of the closet, brought from it the mutilated volume, and sat down again beside me. I stared at the book in his hand: it was a whole book, entire and sound!</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhere was the other half of it?‚Äù I gasped.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSticking through into my library,‚Äù he answered.</p>
			<p>I held my peace. A single question more would have been a plunge into a bottomless sea, and there might be no time!</p>
			<p>‚ÄúListen,‚Äù he said: ‚ÄúI am going to read a stanza or two. There is one present who, I imagine, will hardly enjoy the reading!‚Äù</p>
			<p>He opened the vellum cover, and turned a leaf or two. The parchment was discoloured with age, and one leaf showed a dark stain over two-thirds of it. He slowly turned this also, and seemed looking for a certain passage in what appeared a continuous poem. Somewhere about the middle of the book he began to read.</p>
			<p>But what follows represents‚ÅÝ‚Äînot what he read, only the impression it made upon me. The poem seemed in a language I had never before heard, which yet I understood perfectly, although I could not write the words, or give their meaning save in poor approximation. These fragments, then, are the shapes which those he read have finally taken in passing again through my brain:‚ÅÝ‚Äî</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>‚ÄúBut if I found a man that could believe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In what he saw not, felt not, and yet knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From him I should take substance, and receive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Firmness and form relate to touch and view;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then should I clothe me in the likeness true</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that idea where his soul did cleave!‚Äù</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>He turned a leaf and read again:‚ÅÝ‚Äî</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>‚ÄúIn me was every woman. I had power</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over the soul of every living man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as no woman ever had in dower‚ÅÝ‚Äî</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could what no woman ever could, or can;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All women, I, the woman, still outran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Outsoared, outsank, outreigned, in hall or bower.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>‚ÄúFor I, though me he neither saw nor heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor with his hand could touch finger of mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although not once my breath had ever stirred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A hair of him, could trammel brain and spine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With rooted bonds which Death could not untwine‚ÅÝ‚Äî</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or life, though hope were evermore deferred.‚Äù</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Again he paused, again turned a leaf, and again began:‚ÅÝ‚Äî</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>‚ÄúFor by his side I lay, a bodiless thing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I breathed not, saw not, felt not, only thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made him love me‚ÅÝ‚Äîwith a hungering</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After he knew not what‚ÅÝ‚Äîif it was aught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or but a nameless something that was wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By him out of himself; for I did sing</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>‚ÄúA song that had no sound into his soul;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I lay a heartless thing against his heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Giving him nothing where he gave his whole</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being to clothe me human, every part:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I at last into his sense might dart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus first into his living mind I stole.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>‚ÄúAh, who was ever conquering Love but I!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who else did ever throne in heart of man!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To visible being, with a gladsome cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Waking, life‚Äôs tremor through me throbbing ran!‚Äù</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>A strange, repulsive feline wail arose somewhere in the room. I started up on my elbow and stared about me, but could see nothing.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRaven turned several leaves, and went on:‚ÅÝ‚Äî</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>‚ÄúSudden I woke, nor knew the ghastly fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That held me‚ÅÝ‚Äînot like serpent coiled about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But like a vapour moist, corrupt, and drear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Filling heart, soul, and breast and brain throughout;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My being lay motionless in sickening doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor dared to ask how came the horror here.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>‚ÄúMy past entire I knew, but not my now;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I understood nor what I was, nor where;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I knew what I had been: still on my brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I felt the touch of what no more was there!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I was a fainting, dead, yet live Despair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A life that flouted life with mop and mow!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>‚ÄúThat I was a queen I knew right well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sometimes wore a splendour on my head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose flashing even dead darkness could not quell‚ÅÝ‚Äî</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The like on neck and arms and girdle-stead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And men declared a light my closed eyes shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That killed the diamond in its silver cell.‚Äù</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Again I heard the ugly cry of feline pain. Again I looked, but saw neither shape nor motion. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRaven seemed to listen a moment, but again turned several pages, and resumed:‚ÅÝ‚Äî</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>‚ÄúHideously wet, my hair of golden hue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fouled my fair hands: to have it swiftly shorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I had given my rubies, all for me dug new</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No eyes had seen, and such no waist had worn!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For a draught of water from a drinking horn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one blue breath, I had given my sapphires blue!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>‚ÄúNay, I had given my opals for a smock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A peasant-maiden‚Äôs garment, coarse and clean:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My shroud was rotting! Once I heard a cock</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lustily crow upon the hillock green</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over my coffin. Dulled by space between,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came back an answer like a ghostly mock.‚Äù</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Once more arose the bestial wail.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI thought some foul thing was in the room!‚Äù said the librarian, casting a glance around him; but instantly he turned a leaf or two, and again read:‚ÅÝ‚Äî</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>‚ÄúFor I had bathed in milk and honeydew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In rain from roses shook, that ne‚Äôer touched earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ointed me with nard of amber hue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Never had spot me spotted from my birth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or mole, or scar of hurt, or fret of dearth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never one hair superfluous on me grew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>‚ÄúFleeing cold whiteness, I would sit alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not in the sun‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI feared his bronzing light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in his radiance back around me thrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By fulgent mirrors tempering his might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus bathing in a moon-bath not too bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My skin I tinted slow to ivory tone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>‚ÄúBut now, all round was dark, dark all within!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My eyes not even gave out a phantom-flash;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My fingers sank in pulp through pulpy skin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My body lay death-weltered in a mash</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of slimy horrors‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>With a fearsome yell, her clammy fur staring in clumps, her tail thick as a cable, her eyes flashing green as a chrysoprase, her distended claws entangling themselves so that she floundered across the carpet, a huge white cat rushed from somewhere, and made for the chimney. Quick as thought the librarian threw the manuscript between her and the hearth. She crouched instantly, her eyes fixed on the book. But his voice went on as if still he read, and his eyes seemed also fixed on the book:‚ÅÝ‚Äî</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>‚ÄúAh, the two worlds! so strangely are they one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet so measurelessly wide apart!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, had I lived the bodiless alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from defiling sense held safe my heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then had I scaped the canker and the smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scaped life-in-death, scaped misery‚Äôs endless moan!‚Äù</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>At these words such a howling, such a prolonged yell of agony burst from the cat, that we both stopped our ears. When it ceased, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRaven walked to the fireplace, took up the book, and, standing between the creature and the chimney, pointed his finger at her for a moment. She lay perfectly still. He took a half-burnt stick from the hearth, drew with it some sign on the floor, put the manuscript back in its place, with a look that seemed to say, ‚ÄúNow we have her, I think!‚Äù and, returning to the cat, stood over her and said, in a still, solemn voice:‚ÅÝ‚Äî</p>
			<p>‚ÄúLilith, when you came here on the way to your evil will, you little thought into whose hands you were delivering yourself!‚ÅÝ‚Äî<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝVane, when God created me‚ÅÝ‚Äînot out of Nothing, as say the unwise, but out of His own endless glory‚ÅÝ‚ÄîHe brought me an angelic splendour to be my wife: there she lies! For her first thought was <em>power</em>; she counted it slavery to be one with me, and bear children for Him who gave her being. One child, indeed, she bore; then, puffed with the fancy that she had created her, would have me fall down and worship her! Finding, however, that I would but love and honour, never obey and worship her, she poured out her blood to escape me, fled to the army of the aliens, and soon had so ensnared the heart of the great Shadow, that he became her slave, wrought her will, and made her queen of Hell. How it is with her now, she best knows, but I know also. The one child of her body she fears and hates, and would kill, asserting a right, which is a lie, over what God sent through her into His new world. Of creating, she knows no more than the crystal that takes its allotted shape, or the worm that makes two worms when it is cloven asunder. Vilest of God‚Äôs creatures, she lives by the blood and lives and souls of men. She consumes and slays, but is powerless to destroy as to create.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The animal lay motionless, its beryl eyes fixed flaming on the man: his eyes on hers held them fixed that they could not move from his.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThen God gave me another wife‚ÅÝ‚Äînot an angel but a woman‚ÅÝ‚Äîwho is to this as light is to darkness.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The cat gave a horrible screech, and began to grow bigger. She went on growing and growing. At last the spotted leopardess uttered a roar that made the house tremble. I sprang to my feet. I do not think <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRaven started even with his eyelids.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt is but her jealousy that speaks,‚Äù he said, ‚Äújealousy self-kindled, foiled and fruitless; for here I am, her master now whom she, would not have for her husband! while my beautiful Eve yet lives, hoping immortally! Her hated daughter lives also, but beyond her evil ken, one day to be what she counts her destruction‚ÅÝ‚Äîfor even Lilith shall be saved by her childbearing. Meanwhile she exults that my human wife plunged herself and me in despair, and has borne me a countless race of miserables; but my Eve repented, and is now beautiful as never was woman or angel, while her groaning, travailing world is the nursery of our Father‚Äôs children. I too have repented, and am blessed.‚ÅÝ‚ÄîThou, Lilith, hast not yet repented; but thou must.‚ÅÝ‚ÄîTell me, is the great Shadow beautiful? Knowest thou how long thou wilt thyself remain beautiful?‚ÅÝ‚ÄîAnswer me, if thou knowest.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Then at last I understood that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRaven was indeed Adam, the old and the new man; and that his wife, ministering in the house of the dead, was Eve, the mother of us all, the lady of the New Jerusalem.</p>
			<p>The leopardess reared; the flickering and fleeing of her spots began; the princess at length stood radiant in her perfect shape.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI <em>am</em> beautiful‚ÅÝ‚Äîand immortal!‚Äù she said‚ÅÝ‚Äîand she looked the goddess she would be.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAs a bush that burns, and is consumed,‚Äù answered he who had been her husband. ‚Äú‚ÅÝ‚ÄîWhat is that under thy right hand?‚Äù</p>
			<p>For her arm lay across her bosom, and her hand was pressed to her side.</p>
			<p>A swift pang contorted her beautiful face, and passed.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt is but a leopard-spot that lingers! it will quickly follow those I have dismissed,‚Äù she answered.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThou art beautiful because God created thee, but thou art the slave of sin: take thy hand from thy side.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Her hand sank away, and as it dropt she looked him in the eyes with a quailing fierceness that had in it no surrender.</p>
			<p>He gazed a moment at the spot.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt is not on the leopard; it is in the woman!‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúNor will it leave thee until it hath eaten to thy heart, and thy beauty hath flowed from thee through the open wound!‚Äù</p>
			<p>She gave a glance downward, and shivered.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúLilith,‚Äù said Adam, and his tone had changed to a tender beseeching, ‚Äúhear me, and repent, and He who made thee will cleanse thee!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Her hand returned quivering to her side. Her face grew dark. She gave the cry of one from whom hope is vanishing. The cry passed into a howl. She lay writhing on the floor, a leopardess covered with spots.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe evil thou meditatest,‚Äù Adam resumed, ‚Äúthou shalt never compass, Lilith, for Good and not Evil is the Universe. The battle between them may last for countless ages, but it must end: how will it fare with thee when Time hath vanished in the dawn of the eternal morn? Repent, I beseech thee; repent, and be again an angel of God!‚Äù</p>
			<p>She rose, she stood upright, a woman once more, and said,</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI will not repent. I will drink the blood of thy child.‚Äù My eyes were fastened on the princess; but when Adam spoke, I turned to him: he stood towering above her; the form of his visage was altered, and his voice was terrible.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDown!‚Äù he cried; ‚Äúor by the power given me I will melt thy very bones.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She flung herself on the floor, dwindled and dwindled, and was again a gray cat. Adam caught her up by the skin of her neck, bore her to the closet, and threw her in. He described a strange figure on the threshold, and closing the door, locked it.</p>
			<p>Then he returned to my side the old librarian, looking sad and worn, and furtively wiping tears from his eyes.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
